[WIP] Minimal MAINTAINERS.md file (#25839)
bitcoin/bitcoin: MAINTAINERS.md

# Maintainers

This document serves to clarify the responsibilities of a maintainer as well as
serve as a wiki for maintainers to link to / include resources.

## Current Maintainers

The current maintainers are:

> | Name  | Focus Areas |

Reviewer: Pretty sure I already left a comment about this in the other pull, but I don't see the the point of a focus area column. The focus area is something that is entrusted to the maintainer to decide for themselves. If they can't do that, they shouldn't become a maintainer in the first place.

Also, the focus area may constantly change. For example I no longer care about functional tests as much as I did 5 years ago, because they are in a much better shape by now. Am I supposed to remove myself from that focus area now? Also, achow recently merged a p2p change in commit 22d96d76ab02fc73e7fe0d810bacee4c982df085, so is someone supposed to edit this table before or after the fact? Finally, if all rows mention "general" I wonder what the point is, since the conveyed information is minimal if not none.

Author: I responded on this topic in the other PR ICYMI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25560#discussion_r945171237

Not every maintainer has General tag here. For example, @hebasto and @achow101 do not. It's up to them if they want to update it to list General or not.

If you don't care about the test system as much these days, and don't want to review the work there, it is no issue to update your focus areas. Doing so may also even help highlight if that area is under-maintained, and could maybe use a new maintainer.

W.r.t. @achow101  merging a P2P change, as noted in the document, these are not enforced rules, just documentation. If @achow101 plans to regularly work on P2P, I would think he should update his focus area, if it is one-off or infrequent maybe not. 

Perhaps it would be nice to pair with this table a list of all "focus tags" / systems, regardless of if there is a maintainer currently focusing on it?

Reviewer: The details here will be effectively useless the more broad (Assume my focus area is tests, but someone creates a test for macOS, which I may not be able to review or test) they are and the less often they are updated. I can promise you that this list won't be updated, just like no one updated `REVIEWERS.md`.

Reviewer 2: Have to agree. I'd be surprised if it even gets promptly updated when maintainers join/depart.

Author: Is there a lighter touch way that can be done?

| ------------- | ------------- |
| @laanwj | General  |
| @MarcoFalke   | General, tests, QA  |
| @fanquake   | General, tooling, build system  |
| @hebasto    | UI/UX  |
| @achow101    | Wallet, PSBTs  |
| @glozow     | General, transaction relay and mempool policy |

## Regular Contributors, Scoped Maintainers, General Maintainers, and Lead Maintainers

The title of Maintainer in Bitcoin is more of a "janitorial responsibility"
than a position of privilege. However, the role does include permissions on the
repository, and connotes a general sense of stewardship over the project.

Largely, the role of maintainers is to decide to merge Pull Requests.

> Whether a pull request is merged into Bitcoin Core rests with the project merge

Author: they say different things:

1. Scoping that is what a maintainer is
2. text ripped from CONTRIBUTING.md, which clarifies how a maintainer makes that decision.

maybe the 1st can become:

```
Largely, the role of maintainers is to merge Pull Requests when appropriate.
```

judge the general consensus of contributors. The review process that
establishes general consensus is detailed in
[CONTRIBUTING.mg](/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Thus maintainers role is not directly elevated above that of regular
contributors, as maintainers serve mostly as arbiters of if changes are
acceptable to the contributors to the project in aggregate.

The role of the Maintainer is currently evolving with respect to "Scoped
Maintainers". The concept of a scoped maintainer is that it is helpful to add
maintainers who are subject matter experts in a particular area of the code,
but perhaps not in other areas. As such, maintainers with an explicit scope
typically will avoid merging PRs in areas outside their scope, but may do so on
occasion. As an individual maintainer's experience levels in the project
increase, they may change their focus from scoped to general, but this is not
currently an explicit designation (all maintainers should be considered to be
general at this time). As a rough measure, scoped maintainers should avoid
"stepping on the toes" of work that is being guided by another maintainer or
contributor.

> Historically, one Bitcoin's maintainers was a designated "Lead Maintainer",

Reviewer 3: This section is (or will very soon be?) out of date, maybe just mention that there used to be a lead maintainer but currently there is none. No need to elaborate on the reasons and background too much.

which was most recently @laanwj. However, [in a blog

> post](https://laanwj.github.io/2021/01/21/decentralize.html), @laanwj stated
> that they wanted to take more of a background role as a maintainer and have not
> "passed the baton" to a successor as a Lead Maintainer, and instead focused on
> decentralizing the maintainership ecosystem. As such, while the unofficial

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
post](https://laanwj.github.io/2021/01/21/decentralize.html), @laanwj stated
that they wanted to take more of a background role as a maintainer, and therefore have decided not to "pass the baton" to a successor as a Lead Maintainer, instead choosing to focus on decentralizing the maintainership ecosystem. As such, while the unofficial
```

Author: probably removing this section now that Wlad has more fully stepped down.

title of Lead Maintainer still is held by @laanwj, it should be considered a
bug-not-feature if it confers any additional responsibility or privilege over
other General Maintainers, and may be explicitly deprecated in the future.

## Self Merges

There is no prohibition or process that differentiates self-merges from normal

> merges.

Reviewer 4: If there is no prohibition or process, why include this? Or maybe include why there isn't?

## Nomination and Selection of Maintainers

> Being a Maintainer is not an honor (but it may be honorable to serve as one).

Reviewer 3: Whether something is an honor is very subjective, I would not mention "honor" here at all.

Author: see discussion here. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25560#discussion_r945178336

the intent is to provide clarity from the project against past statements by maintainers describing it as an honour, and honour is used in this sentence precisely to clarify that it is not an honor is the objective sense of the word (an honor, like an award / recognition).

The subjective part is up to "but it may be honorable to serve as one".

Many regular contributors who are capable or experienced enough choose not to
be a Maintainer. Similarly, just because a regular contributor has reached a
certain level of experience does not mean that they "deserve" to be a maintainer.

Maintainers are added by a new maintainer opening a pull-request to add their
key to the Trusted Keys file. For example, see [this pull
request](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/23798). The adding of the key
is reviewed by the community and merged at the discretion of the existing
maintainers. Before opening such a pull request, it is typical that the adding
of the maintainer might be discussed in the regular Bitcoin Core IRC meeting,
but the actual decision making process occurs in the pull request.

## Maintainer Prioritizations

While the maintainers are ultimately not accountable to any particular roadmap,
nor can make regular contributors focus on one area or another, practically the
views and prioritizations of maintainers have an impact on what gets reviewed,

> merged, and the general direction of the project.

Author: Removing it would seem to me be prescriptive (aspirational), rather than descriptive of the current status quo. We should aim to debate prescriptive additions or omissions in follow up work?
